Hello everyone,
welcome to the WordPress Accessibility Day 2020.
My name is Roberto Remedios.
I live in San Jose, Costa Rica.
Hello everyone.
I'm user experience
and a user interface designer.
I'm also an advocate to accessibility.
I have been working on accessibility
a couple of years already.
I fund, with a couple of friends,
a local meetup group here
and a Facebook group,
mostly material in Spanish.
My native language is Spanish,
so if you know the accent sorry.
The next talk that we're gonna listen
is Gutenberg Accessibility,
A Screen Reader User's Perspective.
The speaker will be Raghavendra Satish.
Raghavendra is a digital accessibility evangelist.
He works at the Deque Systems
as a Senior Accessibility Consultant.
He's always breaking [tackling]
web and mobile accessibility challenges.
He's author of an accessibility blog,
and is galvanizing the adoption of accessibility
by inspiring the local tech community
with meetups and mentorships.
He propelled his thoughts
by founding HelloA11Y,
a community [of] accessibility professionals.
When he's away from his computer
we can find Raghava
at the local cafes and restaurants,
sampling cuisine, attending local meetups,
these audiobooks or writing on his personal blog.
He also helped small business
and individuals [with]
digital training, marketing,
and SEO consulting.
He has been building websites
and doing SEO consulting
for more than 14 years.
So please, let's welcome Raghavendra.
Thank you.
Thank you, Roberto.
Am I audible now?
You have your presentation right
now and your presentation is full screen,
so you're ready to go.
Hi everyone.
Welcome to WordPress Accessibility Day 2020.
I'm excited to be here to share
my views on Gutenberg Accessibility.
I'm a person with visual disability.
My name is Raghavendra
and I'll be sharing some of my insights
as a person with disability who is using Gutenberg.
I've been building websites on WordPress
for about 12 years now.
Just because it's easy
to build websites on WordPress.
It's like I fell in love
with WordPress.
I worked with Joomla, Drupal,
and other CMS,
content management systems,
but I fell in love with WordPress
about 12 years back
when I initially
started with web.
as Roberto introduced, I work with Deque Systems
as a Senior Accessibility Consultant.
I also run a meetup community
called HelloA11y, HelloA11y.com,
and we do a lot of meetups
and small conferences
here in India to nurture accessibility
and promote accessibility
within the tech community.
Today's agenda is going to be about
Gutenberg Accessibility.
We all know that Gutenberg
is a rich editor in WordPress
and I'll be taking you through
some of the accessibility and
usability challenges,
like how people with screen readers and
disabilities perceive content
and some of my insights
on how I work with Gutenberg
and basically how I work with content
for my blogs that I run.
I run about 5–6 blogs actively.
A few years back I used to own and run
more than 20–25 blogs.
I'm into affiliate marketing,
search optimization also,
so that's where all my experience
working with content editing
and content management comes.
Today's agenda is going to be why
Gutenberg needs a learning curve.
Even as a power screen reader user,
when I mean a power screen reader user,
I've been using screen reader
for about 15 years now since 2005, 2006.
I'm not born blind.
I became blind at a later
stage in my life
due to Retinitis Pigmentosa,
a genetical disorder.
So I've been losing my eyesight for a while
and I've been a low vision user.
I used a screen magnification
software like Magic
and then slowly I transitioned
in using screen readers full time like
JAWS and NVDA,
which I regularly use now as part of my
job and day-to-day activities on the computer.
So even as a person with a
power screen reader user,
like I've been using for 15 years
the screen reader,
even for me when I initially
started with Gutenberg,
it needs a lot of learning curve
because there are no tutorials on
how to use Gutenberg
with a screen reader.
I'll be demoing some of these challenges
as soon as you get to
the editing part of the post
what happens really and how, what are
the challenges that I faced.
So how to work with Gutenberg
using a screen reader.
We will be walking through a demo
and the usability challenges
and then the some of
the accessibility challenges
that I have seen in Gutenberg.
What is Gutenberg?
Gutenberg is introduced in WordPress 5.0.
It is a rich editor
and, in my perspective,
what I have seen is that you
basically being used to
create rich content.
When I say rich content,
it's not just headings, lists, paragraphs.
Great design also.
The topography, all the layouts –
it has evolved.
It came into existence in WordPress 5.0
and right now version WordPress 5.5 is running,
and the core Gutenberg plugin gets updated once every two weeks.
With every major update
the core is merged into WordPress core.
What I have seen is
there's a collection of blogs,
when everyone started talking about Gutenberg
and saying, it's a block-based design.
As a person with [a] disability
I did not understand what is a block.
So when I was reading articles
on other blogs and websites
they said heading block, paragraph block
or all the list block.
I did not understand
what is a block.
Theoretically it was very difficult
to understand what was a block.
Then when I started working with Gutenberg,
I got a clear picture that
every section of the content area
is called a block.
You create a heading,
it is a block on its own.
You have a paragraph,
it's a block on its own.
Gutenberg gives a lot of control
over the content
and the layout
of these blocks.
You can customize the font size,
colour and styling.
These are some of
the options that I have seen.
From the technical standpoint,
for a person with visual disability,
it was not very useful for me to go and edit,
because I'm not sure exactly what the
color is going to be on the front end.
Also I generally use the basic
theme settings that are there.
We all know the Gutenberg accessibility story –
it's merged with 5.0.
There was a lot of pushback
from the accessibility community.
A lot of accessibility professionals
and the wider community itself said that it
should not be merged with 5.0,
because it's not mature.
There were a lot of
articles on the web
where it was told that it was written,
that the design aspect, like accessibility
is not considered from the start.
But what I see with a
two week development cycle
and being pushed every two weeks,
it's very difficult to keep up with
accessibility, design, development, and
fixes of accessibility bugs.
There were a lot of challenges because
there were a lot of moving parts,
but after two years,
what happened in 2019 is
a WP Campus called for
an independent audit by an agency.
The agency provided it results
and we had close to 300 accessibility bugs
that were found on Gutenberg.
And the Gutenberg was audited,
not the plug-in, but the core that
was merged with WordPress.
So what did the WP Campus audit show?
It showed [a] considerable
amount of accessibility bugs.
There were more than 300 accessibility bugs.
Couple [or] more of these bugs were related
to authoring tool where you upload a video
and there is no way to provide caption.
Some of these are authoring tool challenges
and some are pure accessibility bugs.
After the WP Campus audit
there are a lot of bug fixes on the way.
The accessibility and development teams started
fixing a lot of these accessibility bugs.
I've personally seen some
of these accessibility fix being in place,
during the subsequent Gutenberg plugin releases
and in the core merge also.
If you go to GitHub,
I provided the link here.
There are a couple of significant
accessibility bugs still that are open.
Some of these bugs are
pure technical related
maybe as a person with disability
you might not be
finding it very difficult to navigate,
but they are technically an accessibility bug,
that's why they are called upon.
So how is Gutenberg very difficult?
As I said previously,
it's very difficult for screen reader users.
What I did is as a person with a visual disability,
I work with a lot of other people with disability
in the local community, so me and couple
of my friends who are all screen reader users
and some of these people are
accessibility specialists,
I gave them... I installed the Gutenberg plug-in
and we, I, studied how they're going to use [it].
Some of the power screen reader users
found it very difficult.
They did not understand,
there are a lot of elements
as soon as you open the post screen,
add new post screen,
there are lot of elements.
You click on add block
and your focus moves to a search field.
So they are caught off guard completely.
We are going to discuss
some of these during the demo.
I'll be running a demo of how
I use Gutenberg
and how it is very different
from our Classic Editor.
What happens in our Classic Editor is
you have the title screen and the content area
where you type in the content.
Or generally what happens
as a person with disability,
we use Microsoft Word and
we type in our content
then we put it in the Classic Editor
and we use shortcut keys
to give a heading paragraph and block code
and other markup to the content that we created.
So it was pretty easy for us
and some of them said that,
we know HTML.
So what they do is they use
the Classic Editor, text mode
instead of visual editor
and they mark up the content
directly in Microsoft Word and they just put
it in the editor and publish the content.
That's where you know as a screen reader user
it needs a lot of learning curve here.
It's a lot of visual aspect Gutenberg,
as I said, earlier.
It's there to create great visual design,
but as a person with disability
and who has been writing content
for 12–14 years, I did not find it...
For me it's just headings, paragraph.
It's more content than visual aspect of the [unintelligible].
One of the challenges that we also
faced is with regard to the block definitions.
Some of the blocks, if you go out
onto the Gutenberg search area
and go category by category,
there are some of these blocks
like markdown block
or some of the code
or it's a separator
There are some of these blocks
that we we did not understand,
what exactly that block does.
For some of these blocks
we were not able to find a definition.
So we felt that, if there is a
help what exactly this block does?
How it is going to show up in the front end?
It would have been very helpful
for us to use some of these blocks.
I'm going to show a demo right now.
Robert, I'll be sharing my
screen reader sound,
over Zoom so that people
will be able to hear what I'm navigating.
Let me talk with the administrator,
because I think what you are
sharing is your computer sound.
Yes.
Can you place your mic
close to the screen reader?
[screen reader output]
Okay, you're able to hear my screen reader?
Yes, we hear your screen reader.
[screen reader reading text]
I'm here on a screen.
This is a post. I created a demo post here.
To get a feel of this particular
page this screen, I use headings.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to press
control home to go to the top of the page
[screen reader output]
and then
[screen reader] [unintelligible].... slower
slower slower slower slower.
I'm going to press H.
[screen reader] Edit post heading level 1,
script setting level 2, status and visibility
heading level 2 button expanded, permalink
heading level 2 button expanded, view post
heading level 3,
categories heading level two button expanded,
tags heading level two button collapsed,
feature image heading level two button collapsed,
excerpt heading level two button collapsed,
discussion heading level two button collapsed,
link suggestions heading level two clickable,
wrapping to top, edit post heading level one.
I know I'm at the edit post.
I'm going to press tab here.
[screen reader] Tab, document tools, toolbars
only, add block toggle button.
That's a tool bar. As
soon as I hear it's a toolbar, as a person
with screen reader, I know that I had
to use arrow keys to navigate.
Let's see what happens.
[screen reader] Tool, undo button, redo button
available, content structure button collapse,
block navigation button, add block toggle
button,
tools button collapsed, to activate press
spacebar, undo button
Let's add a block.
[screen reader] Add block toggle button enter,
toggle button, press search for a block, block
library region, search for a block edit, search
for a block, type and text, 110 results found.
Okay
[screen reader] Tab, tab, blocks tab, selected
use clause key plus plus m to move the controled
element, one of three.
If you see here, there are
three tabs: one is blocks.
[screen reader] Patterns tab selected styles
...
These are block patterns.
[screen reader] Reusable tabs selected used
And reusable blocks. One
of the one of the things that confused me
is about this block patterns
and the block templates.
After reading a lot of articles and tutorials,
I came to understand that these
are some of the pre-designed templates
that a person can use.
Just select one of these block pattern
and the visual aspect of the pattern
will appear in the front end
and just you need to update the content.
It was very difficult to understand
when the blocks came.
It took me a while to understand
and then block patterns is something
again it's confusing for me.
So let's go to block.
[screen reader] Blocks tab selected, use tab,
blocks tab panel, text list box, markdown,
one of 11
Okay.
[screen reader] Paragraph, heading, list,
quote, five of 11, code, six of 11.
Okay, let's
[screen reader] Five of 11,
enter, editor content region,
add block, block tools ,
add title demo, content right heading, paragraph,
block, write heading, paragraph block, empty
block, semicolon, start writing or type forward
slash that chooses a block, block colon, quote
block, add block, block colon quote, right
quote, edit contains text, type and text,
percent, right quote edit, contains text,
empty block, semicolon, start writing block
colon quotes, right quote, edit contains
text, type and text,
write citation, edit write
quote, edit contains text,
type and text, home selected,
out of table, right citation, edit, contain
write quote, edit, contains text, type and text
Okay
[screen reader] t-h-i-s space i-s space a
space e-x-a-m-p-l-e, home selected, this is
a example quote
I wrote a quote.
What if I want to insert
a list block inside
this particular quote?
I don't know, I still did not able to figure out.
I was not able to figure out how to embed
one block inside and generally what I
do is like I write the HTML markup.
It's easy for me,
but if I have to put a list block
inside this block code,
I don't know how to do it.
Let's see if there is an option.
[screen reader] Shift tab block colon quote,
shift tab, add block, block tools, block tools
toolbar read only, change block type or style
button menu, press space
I am here on the block tools.
There are some accessibility challenges
with this particular version of Gutenberg
on the core right now.
[screen reader] Space
I press space
[screen reader] Space, change block type,
or style button menu, press space to activate
the menu then navigate with arrow keys, add
title edit, contains text, type and text
I press space, I'm not sure...
[screen reader] demo content,
demo content, add title
<v Roberto We're on the title right now.
Yeah the focus has completely
shifted.
I was trying to expand the more tools.
[screen reader] Add title, tab right, heading,
edit, contains text, type and text, space
Space.
[screen reader] Shift tab, add block, block
tools, block tools toolbar, read only, change
block type or style button menu, press space
to activate the menu then navigate with arrow keys.
I'm going to
press space bar here.
[screen reader] Space, expanded, menu, change
block type or style menu to move through items
press up or down arrow
It says expanded. I'm
pressing down arrow here,
I'm not sure if something
is happening over there.
Yes, you have several options about
paragraph, group, full quote, but they are
not accessible at this point.
Yeah, yes so none
of them are read and one of the
[screen reader] Escape, leaving menus, editor
content region, add block
And it's very difficult, one
of the challenge that I'm faced, we faces,
is like creating content
directly in Gutenberg now.
If I have to keep adding, just imagine
I have 10 paragraphs with
10 headings, if I have to go
through the process of...
[screen reader] Escape, virtual
Building each block
inputting content
[screen reader] Add title, add title
One more challenge
that I face is
[screen reader] Demo content, right heading,
edit, contains text
I'm inside this heading, but
if I press, if I press down arrow from
here, it moves to the
[screen reader] Paragraph block, edit, contains
text, next paragraph,
Next block.
[screen reader] Right heading, edit contains
text, type and text, home right heading,
hello world, edit
What happens is
when I use up and down arrow,
I expect the content to be
read in an edit area,
but here what is happening
is we move from block to block.
And if I want to select the content
in this particular heading,
generally in an edit area, I do control A,
what happens is it select all the blocks.
[screen reader] Hello world
six blocks selected, main region, editor content
region, add block, block tools, add title,
demo contents
If you are seeing, I have selected
all the six blocks that are there in the
[screen reader] Escape, edit post, single
left point, edit post, add type
I'm going back to the screen.
[screen reader] Right heading, edit,
contains text, type and text
escape virtual PC, cursor, escape, tab right heading,
button, paragraph block, row two, this is
a paragraph block, we are trying
to demo this with screen reader.
This is one of the feature
that I really loved about Gutenberg where you shift tab.
[screen reader] Shift tab, right heading,
button heading block, row one level...
There are six blocks.
I know row one, row two.
It reads out this is a paragraph.
Once the blocks are in place
the hierarchy is easily understood,
but creating content inside Gutenberg,
it's becoming very difficult.
Generally we create content like
me and my friends, or all
the people who manage this blog, that we create
content in a Word document and we edit,
we do spell check in Microsoft Word.
We edit everything,
and we put it on a Google Sheets,
people take it from there and then we used
to put it in the Classic Editor,
format it, publish it.
But now taking each piece of content,
like copying each paragraph or heading into
this one became difficult.
So now what we are doing
is we are using the Code Editor.
What I do, is I press alt ctrl shift and
[screen reader] Alt control shift, right heading,
code editor selected, edit post, single left
point add title, edit, add type, tab, type
text, read [unintelligible]
What we do is
we put the content here
then we do the HTML markup
on our own.
We are not using the Block Editor
as much as we are supposed to.
Generally what we do, we create a
[screen reader] Alt
control shift, edit post
[Raghavendra] We create a block.
[screen reader] Set of collapse, main menu,
add block toggle button, enter.
We select the Classic Block
[screen Reader] Main region block library,
cell A, sic, tab rest, search button, tab
tab blocks tab selected, use [unintelligible]
keyplus tab blocks tab panel text list box
classic, one of one
enter, editor content region, block colon
classic block colon classic edit right heading
right heading right head paragraph right heading,
paragraph empty black semicolon start writing
in the right quote edit block colon classic,
classic, edit, toolbar blank edit
We take the Classic block,
paste all the content here, then we go
back to the Code Editor
using alt, control, shift M.
We give the markup, the necessary markup,
or we use some of these rich text tools here.
[screen reader] Shift tab, block colon classic
shift tab, tab, block colon classic, toolbar
with a paragraph button menu menu
It's been easy you know
[screen reader] Bold left bearing control
Because
[screen reader] Metallic left parenthe..
It is easy to mark a paragraph,
to add text bold, hold it
[screen reader] List left pair numbers list
left block with left parenthesis line left
left pair of the line center align right left
insert slash at least left barricade
This has been very easy to
do, otherwise it's becoming very difficult
for us to navigate within blocks,
select content then put it here.
Some of the other challenges
that we face is with the plugins.
[screen reader] Edit post
One of the confusion that we
ran into is understanding the block structures.
[screen reader] Block hold block block
block hold block hold block
insert tool bar and save button, preview blink
left paren opens the publish button collapsed,
settings toggle button
We thought these settings
is part of something to do with Gutenberg.
I did not realize these are post settings.
If I select this post this
[screen reader] Heading publish button, publish button collapsed,
settings toggle button pressed
So all the
[screen reader] Insert classic heading level
two, scripts setting level edit post heading
level wrapping to the bottom, classic heading
level two, percent deep [unintelligible] notifications
[unintelligible] classic heading level two,
scripts setting level to toggle command,
table with two header scripts clickable, edit
the lab tool under content block nav and certainly
output save draft button, preview button collapsed
save draft button, enter, saving,
preview button collapsed, settings toggle button
pressed, space, main scripts setting level two
wrapping to top, edit post heading left
percent D block blank notification blank,
main reach list end, classic current,
rightwards arrow, document button block bread
crumb list of two items, document button,
block breadcrumb list of two items, open publish
panel button collapsed, open document settings
button collapsed, blank, table end, combo
box bottom pulling before closing a table,
blank
and open document settings, button collapse,
space list, document button, block left parent
selected right pair classic heading level
two, wrapping the top, edit post edit heading,
percent, document button open publish panel
button collapsed, enter, main region visibility
colon, publish heading, publish colon immediately,
at suggestion colon add tags,
share post heading level
If you see all these settings
are hidden inside this button.
It's been very difficult to find
some of these settings for us.
In the Classic Editor it has been very easy.
You have the Classic Editor,
you have the categories,
you have the sharing settings,
you have your store rank math,
the SEO snippet where you can edit everything.
It's just one screen with what you
want to show on your screen or not.
In the screen settings
we used to customize them
show these custom meta boxes
and we used to edit them,
but after Gutenberg it was difficult.
One particular time we spent half an hour
trying to find where the categories heading was,
because it was assigned to a default
uncategorized category, one article.
We were trying to find out
where the categories is.
It became very difficult for us.
[screen reader] Feature image heading level
two share this post heading level two button
expanded suggestion colon
For regular users we got lost
at the beginning with all the interface.
Yeah so it's been very
difficult for us like that and
[screen reader] Edit post, add the tool under
content struct, block navigation button collapsed,
content structure button collapsed
Content structure, this
one I understood at a very later stage.
It gives out the structure
of the content like which headings,
paragraphs you have, but all this needs lot
of learning curve and there are no tutorials.
See there's a specific way we are taught
how to use screen readers on the web.
During one of our you know,
like we, me and our friends we gone through
professional training because we are
blind, and they are taught
how to use screen reader on the web.
But after a while you get hang of it,
how things are laid out on the web.
But all this is so confusing
because there's so many moving
[screen reader] Block navigation button circle
toolbar end, preview button and [unintelligible]
And this preview also.
[screen reader] Preview, tab editor top shift
tab, preview button collapsed, space
I expand it.
[screen reader] Tap, menu
to move through items
Nothing happens there also,
even in the preview and I think this preview,
I'm not sure if it is broken or
if it is like accessible
[screen reader] Tab
Because when I press enter
[screen reader] Enter, title,
edit post single left pointing tab, T
equals 4206 and shift tab, tab,
B equals, tab tab, PC cursor
I don't know
[screen reader] To move through items
press up or down arrow.
This stuck
[screen reader] To move through, tab tab P
equals 4206 and preview equals true.
It reads some code.
I'm not able to preview my posts
properly most of the time.
[screen reader] Escape, leaving menus, editor
top bar region, preview button
The preview button
is also not accessible.
[screen reader] Virtual PC click left pane
opens in a new tab right, publish button expanded,
settings toggle button pressed, Genesis toggle
branch toggle button
So these been, after
I understood what settings, what Genesis,
[screen reader] Jetpack toggle button
I understood all the options
of these other block related plugin are here.
[screen reader output unintelligible]
[unintelligible]
I understoond that as soon as
I press rank math table
[screen reader] Edit collab, add to the content
block added, certainly change block, move
up, more option, preview button collapse,
publish button expanded, settings toggle button
Genesis toggle button, rank math toggle,
button enter
So what I'm doing is I'm using
the button B, uh the keys key stroke B to
move from button to button.
[screen reader] Scripts heading level to focus
keyword, heading level two, basic scale, six
errors, heading level two button expanded
So I'm pressing H
to go to the headings.
[screen reader] Additional seven errors, heading
level two button collapsed, title readability
two errors, heading level two
This has been pretty easy once
I understood the layout of this, how the
plugin block plugins work, I understood that
the plugins come in the top
region and I have to you know activate
them and select the options.
I think this is pretty much
what I wanted to show –
some of these accessibility and
usability challenges.
I think we can go for questions.
Yeah, sure.
Thank you very much for the demo.
It has been really nice, get the real
vision of people who interact with Gutenberg usability.
For most users at the beginning is kind of difficult,
because there is a lot of stuff to learn.
I mean visually it looks very clean and simple
but I think it's a lot more complicated
than the regular editor.
Even at a pro tip when you create content
you can paste all your content
on the Classic Editor and then convert
your Classic Editor into all the different blocks
and most of the times WordPress will translate all
your different content, but yes it's difficult.
About the plugins, most of the
plugins are available as a block and then
you call the plugin, but then you need to
make configurations in the same plugin.
So it's very difficult.
Let's start with the first question:
Will you find useful to have easy options
to disable blocks that you can't
or don't wish to use?
There are too many block.
I think it's not the question of disabling
the blocks. I think there are very
few blocks that I use on my websites.
Sometimes I might use Jetpack,
Eventbrite, the calendar leave block.
I use them rarely, but I need them.
So disabling is not an option,
but maybe the way I want to approach
the content itself should be a little different,
because I don't use all these blocks all
the time and all the options. Robert?
Yes sorry, hello over here.
The next question actually is
my personal question and is away from
native blocks, because there is a lot of native
blocks. Did you find the other blocks, the
the plug-in blocks accessible? For example,
Woo-Commerce, Yoast SEO, other Gravity Forms,
Contact Form 7, stuff that you usually
use a lot to create content.
Are they friendly with screen readers or not?
I'm playing with Woo-Commerce
right now. Contact Form 7,
I'm not using it right now, because
I tend to use Jetpack forms.
Jetpack forms are very accessible and the Mailchimp block is
accessible. Ranked Math SEO, Yoast SEO and
other plugins like Atomic Blocks from StudioPress.
They are accessible – the accordions, the
testimonials block and the author block.
Most of the blocks I encountered
are very accessible.
Creating content has been
very easy inside them.
Thank you very much.
The next question will be:
Do you find any particular combination
of screen reader and browser to be better?
I use JAWS plus Chrome, NVDA
plus Chrome. These are my default screen reader combination.
I used to use NVDA plus Firefox earlier, but
now I prefer NVDA plus Chrome.
It's more supported and
I learned screen readers using JAWS.
It's a very little difficult transition
for me to use full-time N-V-D-A, so I tend
to use JAWS a lot when I'm not doing accessibility
testing. When I do accessibility testing
specifically for my clients and or I'm testing
some widget for accessibility I tend to use
NVDA plus Chrome.
Okay thank you,
the last question is:
Unexpected changes of focus are one of the
WordPress Accessibility Team common complaints
about Gutenberg. How often or rarely do you
feel that happen in your users of Gutenberg?
Robert can you repeat the question?
So often, the unexpected changes
from one element to another, the focus,
is one of the main
complaints of Gutenberg.
How often did you think you are
on one specific place,
where you want to go to another place
and it's not working properly?
The major problem that
you run into Gutenberg is because you need
to understand how this Gutenberg is laid out.
Like being a person with screen reader
or you can be even a sighted person,
just can't open Gutenberg and understand it
instantly. Like I run the, I run the Island,
Hyderabad blogging club also here. I run a
club full of bloggers and most of them, I
think I'm the only person with disability.
Me and another friend are the only person
with disability in that club and lot of them
are sighted. And when the Gutenberg came in,
they are like, is there a way to switch back
to the Classic Editor?
Is the question they asked.
We told about the Classic Editor plugin,
but a lot of them did not transition to
Gutenberg immediately.
That took a long time to understand.
We did a lot of workshops with them
to make them understand how Gutenberg works
and how it helps with the design and all that
and now they fell in love with the Gutenberg.
They don't want to transition back to Classic
Editor. Because it was so easy for them
to create stories. It was visual
storytelling and all that. It became
very easy for them to create, so they don't
want to transition back to the Classic Editor.
They're using Gutenberg. It takes a lot of
time to learn Gutenberg, that's the only aspect here.
As a person with a disability
and a screen reader user,
it took a lot of time for me to understand
Gutenberg end-to-end.
Now I can create blocks, content and all,
it's just a little difficult for me
to manage content rather than create it.
Like if I have to copy
each paragraph from Word, Microsoft Word and
put it here into, create one block, put it
in a put it inside that block then go back
to Word again, come back here put it in heading,
it's taking too much of my time.
Awesome, thank you. We
don't have more questions at this moment so
please the people who is watching this over
YouTube feel free to add your questions into
the YouTube chat and we will answer
that on the presentation.
Meantime, maybe I have a last question because
we have another two minutes.
What what do you recommend for people
who is blind or have a disability, to
interact directly with Gutenberg?
You already say it take a lot of time, not
just to understand how Gutenberg work, but
to create great content beyond
the tips that you already give.
Create your content on a Word document and
paste it into WordPress.
What other kind of tip do you have for people?
So one of the other things is,
as you said earlier what I do is create
the content, put it in the Classic Block,
Classic Editor, then I use this plugin called
I think, Bulk Gutenberg, so you change all
the posts into blocks.
So I converted old posts and new posts.
I put them as a regular Classic Block and
then I convert them into blocks. So what I
also did is right now I had a virtual assistant
who is helping me with, who's a sighted person
helping me with all the visual aspect of the
design aspect. Like I only concentrate on
the content and they take care of the pictures,
the visual aspect of all the other things.
[Roberto] Okay, awesome thank you. And maybe
the the last question, because we don't get
any other ones and I have always questions:
If you run as a lead of the WordPress project at this moment
and you decide let's do this 100 percent accessible,
where did you focus to make Gutenberg and
this experience more accessible?
What do you want to see on the future or what do you want
to see on Gutenberg to be more accessible?
If you ask me like what I am
thinking is as I said, uh I want to create
content in Microsoft Word.
Just come here put it and then work on the
formatting and then maybe you know a button
or uh option where it will convert everything
into blocks. And then I hand over
it to my design team.
Basically, I come from the content aspect
of this and as a person with the visual disability,
I don't know if I insert a picture,
where I'm inserting it,
or is it taking completely over
what is the cropping of the image,
where it is placed. Is it placed to the left
or right, all that aspect. So I normally tend
to leave all the design decisions to the design
team and then just work on the content aspect.
If you ask me right now what I
would want to see is, I just want to see
how this Classic Block is there right
now, if I want to input the content I want
to input here, format it, then a button or
you know an option just to convert everything
into blocks. And then the design
team can take it forward from there.
It should be easy for me to publish content,
format content, edit content also.
One of the main challenges that we are facing
right now is with the editing of the content.
Once we put all the content into blocks,
editing of the content is becoming very difficult.
Like you want to edit a
certain line in a particular paragraph,
we used to copy all the content into
Microsoft Word from the Classic Editor do
Control F, look for that particular keyword
and wherever we are supposed to edit them
and just put it back into the editor.
But now with the Gutenberg, it's it's like
you know I have four paragraphs, four headings,
couple of lists, uh it became very difficult
for us to edit the content. And if I copy
from the Code Editor, all the HTML code also
comes in. So it's just not really working
out. It should become easy for us
to edit content in Gutenberg.
Awesome, well thank you very much. Great.
This talk, you have been amazing.
I think that's all for tonight guys.
Please let's thank Raghavendra and let's remember we
we're gonna have our next talk on possibly
10 minutes, 6 UTC time.
It will be Accessibility by Default
in Authoring Tools by Susanna Laurin.
It will be on the same channel.
Let's gonna take a little break and
we will see you again soon. Bye.
Thank you, thank you everyone.
I'll be updating my presentation and
give it to the team here and you can all
follow me on Twitter and other accessible,
all the other channels.